THE YEARS FROM THE MID
60'S TO THE EARLY 80'S
MARKED A TUMULTUOUS TIME
- AN ERA OF REVOLUTION
AND ENCROACHING CYNICISM,
A TRANSITION FROM
EARNEST IDEALISM TO
TRENCHANT NARCISSISM.
IN LATIN AMERICA,
THIS PERIOD ALSO
BROUGHT WITH IT
SOCIAL CHANGE AND
CULTURAL STRESS,
AND THE LITERATURE
OF THE PERIOD
REFLECTED THESE
DYNAMIC TENSIONS.
DEFINING THE LITERATURE
FROM THIS TIMEFRAME
EMBODIES ALL THE
DIFFICULTIES OF
DEFINING ANY ERA AS
THERE ARE SO MANY FACTORS
COMPETING FOR
ATTENTION:
EVOLVING AESTHETICS AND NEW
THEORETICAL APPROACHES;
POLITICAL
POLEMICS AND THE
CHANGING ROLE OF THE
WRITER AS AN INTELLECTUAL;
EVEN PERSONAL GRUDGES
COME INTO PLAY.
AND PROMINENT
AMONG THESE FACTORS
IS THE EXPLODING ROLE
OF THE MASS MEDIA
- AND IN PARTICULAR
TELEVISION -
IN THE EBB AND FLOW
OF CULTURAL EXPRESSION.
THIS WAS A TIME WHEN
THE WORLD WAS BECOMING
MORE INTERCONNECTED.
EVENTS ACROSS THE
CONTINENT AND THE WORLD
WERE HAVING A PROFOUND
EFFECT ON THE MOOD
AND DIRECTION OF
LATIN AMERICA;
EVENTS SUCH AS THE MAY
'68 STRIKES IN FRANCE
THAT NEARLY BROUGHT THE
GOVERNMENT TO ITS KNEES;
THE RIOTS IN MEXICO
LEADING UP TO
THE TLATELOLCO MASSACRE,
WITH AT LEAST 300 DEAD;
THE SPREAD OF ARMED
AND GUERRILLA WARFARE
THROUGHOUT
LATIN AMERICA;
AND THE
CONTINUING ECHOES
OF THE CUBAN
REVOLUTION OF 1959.
AS DIVISIVE AND
CONTROVERSIAL AS THESE
EPISODES WERE, THE
ARTISTIC RESPONSE TO
SIMMERING REVOLUTION
WAS JUST AS INTENSE.
NEVER WAS THE RELATIONSHIP
BETWEEN LITERATURE
AND POLITICS SO
CLOSELY INTERWOVEN,
OR SO CLOSELY FOLLOWED.
THE REVOLUTION WAS LIVE,
AND IT WAS TELEVISED.
*
LITERARY CRITICS GENERALLY
IDENTIFY AS A DISTINCT
LITERARY PERIOD THE TIME
FROM THE 1960'S UP UNTIL
THE FALL OF SALVADOR
ALLENDE'S GOVERNMENT
IN CHILE IN 1973, OR TO
THE RAPID PROLIFERATION OF
MILITARY DICTATORSHIPS
IN AROUND 1976.
THE ENORMOUS IMPACT OF
THESE POLITICAL FACTS
IN DEFINING
LITERARY PERIODS
HIGHLIGHTS THE COVALENT
BOND BETWEEN POLITICS
AND LATIN AMERICAN
POETRY AND PROSE.
WHICH IS NOT TO SAY
THAT THIS RELATIONSHIP
WAS SOMETHING NEW.
ON THE CONTRARY, THIS
LINK CHARACTERIZES
MUCH OF THE
CONTINENT'S LITERATURE
IN THE CENTURIES AFTER
THE SPANISH CONQUEST.
HOWEVER, DURING THIS
TIME THE CONVERGENCE OF
POLITICS,
INTELLECTUAL TRENDS,
AND AESTHETICS
COMPLETELY RESTRUCTURED
THE INSTITUTIONS
OF LITERATURE.
HOW WORKS WERE PRODUCED,
READ, AND INTERPRETED
WAS FOREVER AND
IRREVOCABLY CHANGED.
THERE WAS A STRONG SENSE
THAT REVOLUTION IS
IMMINENT, AND OF THE
INEVITABILITY OF
SIGNIFICANT SOCIAL
TRANSFORMATION.
THIS WAS TO BE A
TRANSFORMATION IN WHICH
INTELLECTUALS WERE CALLED
UPON - OBLIGATED, IN FACT
- TO PLAY A PIVOTAL ROLE,
BECOMING INVOLVED IN EVERY
STRATA OF SOCIETY,
FROM THE AESTHETIC
TO THE POLITICAL, WITH
ALL STOPS IN BETWEEN.
THE LATE 60'S AND EARLY
70'S SET THE STAGE
FOR THIS CULTURAL
MAKEOVER.
THE LATIN
AMERICAN BOOM -
A LITERARY PHENOMENON
THAT WAS EQUAL PARTS
INNOVATIVE WRITING AND
AGGRESSIVE MARKETING -
HAD USHERED IN THE ERA
OF THE SUPERSTAR AUTHOR:
WRITERS LIKE
JORGE LUIS BORGES,
GABRIEL GARCIA
MARQUEZ,
AND CARLOS FUENTES
BECAME HOUSEHOLD NAMES.
YET AS THEY THRIVED, OTHER
EQUALLY TALENTED WRITERS
TOILED IN ANONYMITY.
AS A RESULT, A CHASM
APPEARED BETWEEN THOSE
WHO ACHIEVED FAME,
INTERNATIONAL EXPOSURE,
AND SUCCESS - AND
THOSE WHO DID NOT.
THIS DYNAMIC GENERATED
AESTHETIC AND POLITICAL
DISPUTES AS WELL AS
INTENSE PERSONAL FEUDS.
DURING THE BOOM IN LATIN
AMERICAN LITERATURE,
THE NOVEL
REIGNED SUPREME,
DEMONSTRATING ITS ALMOST
LIMITLESS CAPACITY
FOR EXPERIMENTATION,
TRANSFORMATION,
AND THE REINVENTION
OF CULTURAL TRADITIONS.
HOWEVER, AS THE 1960'S
GAVE WAY TO THE 70'S,
THE CONTRADICTIONS
BECOME MORE PRONOUNCED
AND THE TONE OF LATIN
AMERICAN LITERATURE
BECAME MORE URGENT.
BY 1970, THE RACE
WAS ON TO DEVELOP NEW
LITERARY FORMATS AND
GENRES THAT GAVE VOICE TO
THE PREVAILING SENSE
OF SOCIAL CRISIS.
WRITERS TOOK UP
THEIR PENS TO WRITE
PERSONAL TESTIMONIALS,
POLITICAL POETRY,
AND SONGS OF PROTEST.
AT THAT TIME, THERE
IS A GENRE STRUGGLE.
THERE IS AN INITIAL
GAMBLE ON THE NOVEL
AS A POLITICAL GENRE,
OR ONE LIABLE TO BECOME
POLITICIZED, TO BE
INVESTED WITH POLITICS.
ONCE THE INTELLECTUAL
FRONT IS FRACTURED
AND THE MARKETPLACE IS
SEEN AS ANTIPOLITICAL,
ATTENTION TURNS TO POETRY,
WHICH HAS INITIALLY BEEN
DISCARDED AS TOO
LYRICAL, TOO PERSONAL,
TOO INDIVIDUALISTIC, BUT
POETRY SUDDENLY EMERGES
IN CONNECTION WITH THE
ADVENT OF THE PROTEST SONG.
SUDDENLY, LITERATURE WAS
NOT JUST A LUXURY OF THE
INTELLIGENTSIA - IT WAS
A CULTURAL NECESSITY,
A COMMUNAL
SEARCH FOR TRUTH
IN MORALLY
AMBIGUOUS TIMES.
WRITERS SUCH AS THE
URUGUAYAN EDUARDO GALEANO
AND ARGENTINEAN RODOLFO
WALSH ANNOUNCED THAT THE
NOVEL - THE SUPERSTAR OF
THE BOOM - WAS IN CRISIS.
THE REASON?
ITS SEEMING
RELUCTANCE,
IN THE HANDS OF
LATIN AMERICAN AUTHORS,
TO CONFRONT THE
REALITY OF SOCIAL CHANGE.
THE TIME WAS RIGHT
TO CREATE NEW FORMS
SUCH AS THE TESTIMONIAL
AND TO REINTERPRET
INDIGENOUS FORMS
SUCH AS THE CRONICA.
AND, TRADITIONAL GENRES
SUCH AS THE SHORT STORY,
THE NOVEL, AND IN
PARTICULAR POETRY WERE
REFOCUSED TO ECHO THE
CONCERNS AND CONTROVERSIES
OF THE 60'S,
70'S, AND 80'S.
HOWEVER, AS THE
70'S PROGRESSED,
THE POLITICAL CLIMATE
BECAME INCREASINGLY DARK.
COUPS D'ETAT
WERE COMMONPLACE,
AS WERE
HAM-FISTED DICTATORS
AND RAMPANT POLITICAL
PERSECUTION.
LITERATURE WAS TORN
ASUNDER BY EXILE,
DISAPPEARANCE,
SILENCE, AND DEATH.
LITERARY EXPRESSION
BECAME MORE CAUTIOUS,
SHIFTING TOWARDS SUGGESTION,
METAPHOR, AND IMPLICATION.
SIMPLE DECLARATIVE
SENTENCES BECAME
EXTRAORDINARILY DANGEROUS,
AND EXCEEDINGLY RARE.
IN LATIN AMERICA,
THE CRONICA IS A
WELL-ESTABLISHED GENRE
WHOSE ORIGINS CAN BE
TRACED BACK TO THE
CRONISTAS OF THE INDIES.
THE TURN-OF-THE-CENTURY
MOVEMENT KNOWN AS
MODERNISMO HAD GIVEN RISE
TO A NEW KIND OF CRONICA -
A UNIQUE GENRE OF SHORT
PROSE THAT COULD BE EITHER
FICTION OR HISTORY
AND WHICH RETAINS
ITS POPULARITY TO THIS
DAY IN LATIN AMERICA.
THIS UNUSUAL HYBRID OF
LITERATURE AND JOURNALISM
TYPICALLY NARRATES THE
EVENTS OF CONTEMPORARY
CITY LIFE AND ATTEMPTS
TO CAPTURE THE ESSENCE
OF A PARTICULAR
MOMENT IN TIME.
THIS DYNAMIC TENSION
BETWEEN TWO DISTINCT
GENRES IS IDEALLY SUITED
TO INVESTIGATING SOCIAL
CHANGE, EXPLOSIVE URBAN
GROWTH, AND INTENSE
DEBATES ABOUT THE ROLE
OF THE INTELLECTUAL.
AND, THE CRONICA IS
NOT ONLY A FORUM FOR
DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS,
BUT ALSO A NARRATIVE FORM
THAT HIGHLIGHTS THE
SUBJECTIVITY OF THE AUTHOR.
THE URBAN CRONICA
PRESENTS THE POSSIBILITY
OF TELLING A
STORY IN A NEW WAY,
BY RECOUNTING
EVENTS AS THEY OCCUR
WITH JOURNALISTIC AND
HISTORICAL OBJECTIVITY.
THIS STANCE BECOMES
PROBLEMATIC, HOWEVER,
WHEN THE TOPIC IS
POPULAR CULTURE -
THE MINUSCULE DISTANCE
BETWEEN SUBJECTIVITY
AND OBJECTIVITY
PROMOTES CONTAMINATION
BETWEEN THE CRONISTA
AND HIS SUBJECT MATTER.
THE MEXICAN WRITER AND
ESSAYIST CARLOS MONSIVAIS
WAS ONE OF THE MAJOR
CRONISTAS OF THE CONTINENT
AND AN INTELLECTUAL FORCE
TO BE RECKONED WITH
FOR THE LAST
THIRTY YEARS.
IN HIS WORKS HE RECREATES
THE CHAOS OF THE
URBAN EXPERIENCE BY
INTERWEAVING WORDS
AND PHOTOGRAPHS INTO
A NARRATIVE COLLAGE.
IN PERHAPS ONE OF HIS
MOST IMPORTANT BOOKS,
DAYS TO REMEMBER,
HE INVESTIGATES
THE TLATELOLCO
MASSACRE OF 1968.
THE YEAR 1968 IN GENERAL,
AND OCTOBER 2 IN PARTICULAR,
MARK A TURNING POINT IN
THE HISTORY OF MEXICO
BECAUSE IT DESTROYED
MIDDLE CLASS CONFIDENCE
IN NEVER-ENDING
PROGRESS.
BECAUSE IT LAID BARE THE
CRIMINAL ASPECTS OF A
REGIME THAT, IN THE END,
ENDURED FOR 71 YEARS.
BECAUSE IT GAVE A
GENERATION THE CHANCE
TO CONFRONT ITS
MORAL STANDARDS
AND IT GAVE
THAT GENERATION
THE OPPORTUNITY
TO EMBRACE ETHICS,
WHICH PREVIOUSLY
HAD BEEN UNKNOWN.
BECAUSE IT CAUSED THE
MEMBERS OF THAT GENERATION
WHO WADED INTO THE
FRAY TO FEEL GUILTY,
WHICH WAS A FEELING THEY
HADN'T FELT BEFORE.
AND BECAUSE IT SHOWED
THE POWER OF MEMORY.
IT IS THE ONLY EVENT
LIKE IT THAT I KNOW OF
IN THE HISTORY
OF MEXICO.
IN A VERY PROFOUND WAY -
WITH DISDAIN, CONDEMNATION,
AND EXTRAORDINARY CRITICISM
OF THOSE RESPONSIBLE -
THAT RELIES ENTIRELY
ON THE LABOR OF MEMORY
THROUGH BOOKS, ARTICLES,
DISCUSSIONS, DEMONSTRATIONS.
IT IS A TRIUMPH
OF MEMORY,
AND THAT DOES MARK
A TURNING POINT.
THIS EVENT WAS THE CLIMAX
OF POLITICAL UNREST
LEADING UP TO THE
MEXICO CITY OLYMPICS,
IN WHICH BETWEEN 200 AND
300 PROTESTERS WERE KILLED.
THE BOOK RECOUNTS
THE CLASHES BETWEEN
THE POLICE, THE
MILITARY, AND STUDENTS
IN VARIOUS PARTS
OF THE CITY.
SHE LEADS THE FUNERAL.
THIN FACE, HARDENED
THROUGH THE LONG
FAMILIARITY WITH
BLIND CIRCUMSTANCES,
WITH THE SUFFOCATING
SHADOWS OF POVERTY,
A FACE WHOSE
FIRMNESS IS TOLD BY
ITS UTTER LACK
OF IMPATIENCE,
A FACE SHAPED
BY MOURNING,
EVEN BEFORE
ANYBODY HAD DIED.
HER CONCENTRATED
EXPRESSION IS THE SUMMARY
OF CENTURIES THAT TRUSTED
IN A BRIGHT FUTURE,
AN INSTRUMENT OF
RETRIBUTION AND REPAIR
THAT NOBODY HAS
YET TO UNDERSTAND.
THE CITY DEPICTED IN
MONSIVAIS' CRONICAS
IS THE PEOPLE'S CITY,
HOME TO THE OUTCAST,
THE SHADY CHARACTER,
THE BIT PLAYER -
A PLACE WHERE THE ICONS
OF THE CULTURAL FACTORIES
SEEM TO OFFER A
SYMBOL OF NATIONHOOD,
OF "MEXICANNESS".
ANOTHER IMPORTANT
BOOK IN THIS VEIN IS
THE NIGHT OF TLATELOLCO,
PUBLISHED IN 1971,
BY THE MEXICAN WRITER
AND JOURNALIST
ELENA PONIATOWSKA.
IN IT SHE RELATES HER
INTERVIEWS WITH THOSE
WHO WERE THERE AS
THE TRAGEDY UNFOLDED,
AND WITH THE FAMILIES
OF THOSE WHO DIED.
HER WORK IS A KIND
OF PROSE TAPESTRY,
A COLLECTIVE
TESTIMONY
COMPRISED OF
MANIFOLD VOICES.
HER TECHNIQUE ENTICES THE
READER TO INSERT MEANING
INTO THE SPACES BETWEEN
THE TESTIMONIALS.
THE READER CREATES
THE COLLAGE;
PONIATOWSKA ARTFULLY
ASSEMBLES THE TILES.
THERE ARE THE VOICES
OF THE STUDENTS,
THE PROFESSORS,
THE PARENTS:
THEY RECOUNT THEIR
OWN PARTICIPATION
IN THE MARCHES AND
THEY PASS JUDGMENT
- BOTH POSITIVE
AND NEGATIVE -
ON THE MOVEMENT.
IT IS A BOOK WHICH BANKS
ON THE POWER OF THE
WRITTEN WORD TO PRESERVE
AND DISSEMINATE
A MANY-SIDED
MEMORY OF AN EVENT
THAT OTHERWISE WOULD
HAVE BEEN DISAPPEARED
FROM THE COLLECTIVE
SOCIAL CONSCIOUSNESS.
PEOPLE CAME TO SEE ME TO
TELL ME THINGS THAT I
COULDN'T BELIEVE WERE
HAPPENING IN MY COUNTRY.
I WAS VERY EMBARRASSED
AND HORRIFIED BY THEM.
I HAD TO VERIFY THEM.
BUT I DIDN'T GO ON MY OWN
INITIATIVE, TO TLATELOLCO.
I WENT THERE BECAUSE
I DIDN'T THINK
WHAT I HEARD
WAS BELIEVABLE.
I WAS TOLD THERE WAS BLOOD
SMEARED ON THE WALLS,
THAT THERE WERE
THOUSANDS OF SHOES LEFT
IN THE STONE CORRIDORS FROM
PEOPLE WHO HAD RUN AWAY,
THAT THERE WERE
WOMEN'S SHOES,
THAT I SHOULD
GO AND SEE THEM,
THAT THERE WERE MACHINE
GUN BULLET HOLES
IN ALL THE ELEVATORS
AROUND TLATELOLCO SQUARE
IN THE HOUSING COMPLEX,
SO OF COURSE I WENT.
"SINCE THEN I CANNOT
SEE A HELICOPTER
WITHOUT MY
HANDS SHAKING.
MANY MONTHS AFTER I'D SEEN
IT - AND THAT, FROM MY CAR
- THE HELICOPTER SHOOTING
ON THE MULTITUDE,
I COULD NOT WRITE BECAUSE
OF MY SHAKING HANDS".
- MARTA ZAMORA
VERTIZ, SECRETARY.
"IT WAS A MASS OF PEOPLE
RUNNING HERE AND THERE
AND FALLING AND GOING
AWAY AND FALLING AGAIN.
I THOUGHT THAT THE
LOGICAL THING TO DO
WAS TO GO WHERE THERE
WAS NO SHOOTING.
NOW I KNOW THAT THEY WERE
ALSO SHOOTING AT THEM
FROM THAT SIDE".
- MARGARITA NOLASCO,
ANTHROPOLOGIST.
THE NIGHT OF TLATELOLCO
IS CLOSELY RELATED
TO ANOTHER IMPORTANT
GENRE OF THIS PERIOD -
THE NON-FICTION
TESTIMONIAL.
ONE OF THE PRIMARY
EXPONENTS OF THIS FORM
WAS THE ARGENTINEAN
RODOLFO WALSH,
WHO WAS ASSASSINATED IN
1977 BY A QUASI-MILITARY
GROUP WITH TIES TO THE
ARGENTINEAN DICTATORSHIP.
WALSH WAS THE AUTHOR OF
INCISIVE TEXTS SUCH AS
THE SATANOWSKY CASE,
WHO KILLED ROSENDO?
AND OPERATION MASSACRE.
IN HIS WORKS, WALSH
PROPOSED AN ENTIRELY
FRESH APPROACH
TO LITERATURE.
THIS NEW TEXTUALITY
WAS TO BE OPEN, POROUS,
AND PURPOSELY AT ODDS WITH
TRADITIONAL JOURNALISM
AND HISTORY WRITING.
HIS WORKS WERE OFTEN
DELIBERATELY UNFINISHED,
LEAVING THEMSELVES OPEN
TO NEW TESTIMONIALS,
ARGUMENTS, AND CORRECTIONS
TO THE CENTRAL THESIS.
ANOTHER POTENT FEATURE
IN THESE NOVELS
IS FRAGMENTATION.
THIS TOO IS DUE TO
THE ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
THAT REPRESENTATION
CANNOT BE TOTAL,
INVOLVES CLIPPING
AND IS THEREFORE
PARTIAL AND FRACTURED.
THE USE OF ELLIPSIS
FOLLOWS THIS SAME LOGIC.
THERE IS ALSO A RUPTURE
OF THE IDEA OF GENRE.
THERE ARE TRANSFERS
BETWEEN GENRES,
FOR INSTANCE IN
THE CASE OF WALSH,
WHO ESTABLISHES A VERY
INTERESTING CROSSROADS
BETWEEN LITERATURE
AND JOURNALISM.
THE CASE OF WALSH IS NOT
MERELY THAT OF SOMEONE
WHO WRITES LITERATURE
AND DEFENDS THE GENRE OF
TESTIMONY, AND NOT JUST
SPURRED ON BY THE MOMENT,
BUT OF SOMEONE WHO
PUBLISHES A UNION
NEWSPAPER AND
ACTIVELY INTERVENES
AS AN INTELLECTUAL
THROUGH LETTERS
IN THE ACTIVITIES OF
THE MILITARY JUNTA.
OPERATION MASSACRE WAS
PRESENTED IN VARIOUS
EDITIONS THAT MODIFIED
AND, OVER TIME,
RADICALIZED THE PIECE.
THE FIRST EDITION
OF THE WORK
HAD A HIGHLY
EMOTIONAL AFFECT;
LATER EDITIONS BECAME
INCREASINGLY IRONIC.
WITHIN THIS
COMPLEX DYNAMIC,
THE BODY OF TESTIMONIALS
LAYS ITS BETS
ON THE EXISTENCE OF SOME
KIND OF ABSOLUTE TRUTH,
A PLACE WHERE
RELATIVISM IS BANISHED.
DON HORACIO IS SO CONFUSED
THAT HE DOES NOT TRY
TO CLOSE THE BAG.
HE RUNS, TURNS THE
KEY IN THE LOCK,
AND BEFORE HE FINISHES
REMOVING THE CHAIN,
THE DOOR IS SHATTERED
VIOLENTLY FROM OUTSIDE,
THE LOCK COLLAPSES AND
HE IS CARRIED ALONG
BY THE BUSTLE
OF POLICEMEN
AND CIVILIANS WITH
LONG AND SHORT GUNS.
EVERYTHING HAPPENS
WITH THE SPEED
OF A LIGHTNING BOLT.
THE TALL, STOUT MAN
WITH THE BROWN MOUSTACHE
LEADS THE GROUP.
IN HIS RIGHT HAND HE HOLDS
A 45 CALIBER PISTOL.
HE SHOUTS, WITH A
HOARSE AND DOUGHY VOICE
THAT SOMETIMES SOUNDS
SLURRED WITH DRINK.
HE WEARS OLIVE LIGHT
TROUSERS AND A SHORT JACKET:
IT IS THE UNIFORM
OF THE ARGENTINE ARMY.
DON HORACIO BACKS
DOWN, FRIGHTENED.
HE TRIES TO RAISE HIS
HANDS WITHOUT LETTING GO
OF THE HOT WATER BAG THAT
IS BURNING HIS FINGERS.
THE HEAD OF THE
GROUP IS NOT AMUSED.
"WHERE IS TANCO?"
HE SHOUTS.
BEGINNING IN THE 1960'S,
THE BRIGHT LINE BETWEEN
LITERATURE AND POPULAR
CULTURE BECAME
INCREASINGLY MORE
DIFFICULT TO DISCERN.
IN ARGENTINA, THE CULTURE
OF THE MASSES BECAME
HEAVILY POLITICIZED
THROUGH THE ICONIC FIGURES
OF JUAN PERON AND
HIS WIFE, EVA.
AS THE CRITIC PABLO
ALABARCES HAS NOTED,
THIS COMMINGLING LED TO
A DISTINCT SET OF THEMES
IN THE WORK OF
RODOLFO WALSH.
IN HIS BEST-KNOWN PIECES
OF FICTION, SUCH AS THE
SHORT STORY ENTITLED "THAT
WOMAN", WALSH EXAMINED
THE INTELLECTUAL WHO
TURNS TO POPULAR CULTURE
TO DISCERN THE TRUTH OF
HIS NATION'S TEMPERAMENT.
THROUGH THIS CHARACTER THE
AUTHOR ENGAGES THE STATE
IN A POINTED CONVERSATION
ABOUT ITS FUTURE, ITS
FICTION, AND THE SEMIOTICS
OF ITS NATIONAL SYMBOLISM.
ANOTHER DEBATE THAT
DEFINES THIS PERIOD
REVOLVES AROUND REALISM,
THE AESTHETIC MOVEMENT
DEDICATED TO WHAT THE
ITALIAN FILM DIRECTOR
ROBERTO
ROSSELINI CALLED
"THE ARTISTIC SHAPE
OF THE TRUTH".
AS REALISM ENTERED
THE LATTER HALF OF
THE 20TH CENTURY, IT
BECAME INTERTWINED WITH
MARXIST CONCEPTIONS OF
CULTURE AND REVOLUTION.
SEEN IN THIS LIGHT,
LITERATURE COULD BECOME
A MEANS TO AN END, A
MECHANISM THAT GENERATES
SOCIAL CHANGE AND AWAKENS
SLUMBERING CONSCIENCES.
LATIN AMERICAN
WRITERS WERE INSPIRED
IN PARTICULAR
BY THE FRENCH:
JEAN PAUL SARTRE'S
EXISTENTIALIST WORLDVIEW,
MICHEL FOUCAULT'S
POSTMODERNIST
INTERPRETATIONS OF THE
MAY '68 UPRISING IN PARIS,
AND BY THE FRENCH
GOVERNMENT'S BRUTAL
RESPONSE TO ALGERIA'S
BID FOR INDEPENDENCE.
IN PERU, MIGUEL GUTIERREZ
AND OSWALDO REYNOSO
FOUNDED A GROUP
CALLED NARRATION,
AND PUBLISHED A
JOURNAL OF THE SAME NAME.
NARRATION CARRIED ON A
TRADITION OF DISCUSSION
AND DEBATE THAT CAN
BE TRACED BACK TO THE
ORIGINS OF MODERNISMO,
IF NOT EARLIER.
IN THE 70'S, HOWEVER,
JOURNALS BECAME
PARTICULARLY IMPORTANT.
THEY CHAMPIONED
WHAT THEY TERMED
"COMPROMISED" LITERATURE,
EXEMPLIFIED BY WORKS
SUCH AS THE OLD SAURIAN
RETIRES BY MIGUEL GUTIERREZ
OR IN OCTOBER THERE
ARE NO MIRACLES
AND THE SCARAB AND THE
MAN BY OSWALDO REYNOSO.
WHEN CONTEMPLATING LATIN
AMERICAN LITERATURE FROM
THIS PERIOD, NO ONE WRITER
PERSONIFIES THE TENSIONS
AND CONFLICTING AGENDAS
THAT BESET AUTHORS OF THE
ERA BETTER THAN THE
ARGENTINEAN NOVELIST
JULIO CORTAZAR.
AS A RENOWNED AND HIGHLY
VISIBLE INTELLECTUAL,
CORTAZAR PLAYED OUT HIS
CAREER IN A STATE OF
TENSION BETWEEN
AESTHETICS AND POLITICS.
AN ANTI-PERONIST, HE
EMIGRATED TO FRANCE
IN THE EARLY 1950'S.
IN HIS LATER YEARS,
CORTAZAR BECAME ACTIVELY
ENGAGED WITH LEFTIST
CAUSES IN LATIN AMERICA,
SUPPORTING BOTH THE
CUBAN REVOLUTION AND THE
SANDINISTA GOVERNMENT
IN NICARAGUA.
YET HE ALWAYS STROVE TO
ENDOW HIS WRITING WITH A
DEGREE OF AUTONOMY
FROM HIS POLITICS.
HOWEVER, OVER THE
COURSE OF HIS CAREER
IT IS CLEAR THAT HIS
THEMES WERE SHIFTING,
GRADUALLY, TO
TOPICS ANCHORED IN
CONTEMPORARY LATIN
AMERICAN REALITY.
AFTER THE IMPACT OF HIS
BREAKOUT NOVEL HOPSCOTCH,
WHICH ELECTRIFIED THE
LITERARY WORLD IN THE 60'S,
HE REMAINED HIGHLY PROLIFIC,
PUBLISHING NOVELS,
PLAYS, AND POEMS RIGHT UP
UNTIL HIS DEATH IN 1984.
IN 1982 HE PUT OUT
UNREASONABLE HOURS,
HIS FINAL VOLUME OF
STORIES, WHICH INCLUDES
TALES THAT ARE OVERTLY
POLITICAL IN NATURE.
AMONG THEM IS A STORY
ENTITLED "MEETING",
WHICH FEATURES CHE
GUEVARA, FIDEL CASTRO,
AND THE LANDING
THAT LAUNCHED
THE CUBAN REVOLUTION.
THE WORK IS REMARKABLE AS
MUCH FOR ITS POLITICAL
BRAVADO AS IT IS FOR
CORTAZAR'S SEEMINGLY
EFFORTLESS MASTERY
OVER HIS CRAFT.
CORTAZAR HAS ONLY ONE
STORY IN HIS ENTIRE
COLLECTION THAT HAS TO
DO WITH THE REVOLUTION.
JUST ONE.
I'M REFERRING TO THE
CUBAN REVOLUTION.
HE HAS ANOTHER STORY ABOUT
THE NICARAGUAN REVOLUTION.
BUT EXCEPT
FOR THOSE TWO,
NO STORY OF HIS DEALS
DIRECTLY WITH REVOLUTION.
THAT IS TO SAY, FROM THE
LITERARY POINT OF VIEW,
THERE WAS
NO INFLUENCE.
THE INFLUENCE
WAS IDEOLOGICAL,
BUT IT ISN'T
MANIFESTED
STRAIGHTFORWARDLY
IN ANY OF THEM,
PRECISELY BECAUSE
THESE WRITERS THINK
- AND IN THIS THEY
DO MAKE A BREAK
WITH THE
PREVIOUS GENERATION -
THAT POLITICAL THOUGHT
IS NOT TO BE EXPRESSED
STRAIGHTFORWARDLY
THROUGH LITERATURE.
AT LEAST WE WERE NO
LONGER IN THE DAMN BOAT,
BETWEEN SICKNESS
AND WAVES,
STROKES AND PIECES
OF WET COOKIES,
BETWEEN MACHINE GUNS AND
DRIBBLES, SOAKING WET,
COMFORTING EACH OTHER,
WHEN WE COULD, WITH THE
LITTLE TOBACCO THAT WAS
LEFT DRY BECAUSE LUIS
(WHOSE NAME WASN'T LUIS,
BUT WE HAD SWORN NOT TO
REMEMBER OUR NAMES
UNTIL THE DAY ARRIVED)
HAD HAD THE GOOD IDEA
TO PUT IT IN A TIN BOX
THAT WE OPENED
MORE CAREFULLY
THAN IF IT WAS
FULL OF SCORPIONS.
WAVE GOES AND
WAVE COMES,
THE BUCKETS
SKINNING OUR HANDS,
ME WITH MY DAMNED ASTHMA
AND ALMOST EVERYBODY ILL,
BENDING THEMSELVES
TO VOMIT
AS IF THEY WOULD SPLIT
THEMSELVES IN TWO.
UNTIL, ON THE SECOND
NIGHT, A GREEN BILE
TOOK FROM LUIS THE DESIRE
TO LAUGH, BETWEEN THAT
AND THE NORTH THAT DID
NOT LET US SEE THE LIGHT
OF CABO CRUZ, A DISASTER
THAT NOBODY HAD IMAGINED.
ALWAYS A BELLWETHER OF
CHANGE, LATIN AMERICAN
POETRY REINVENTED ITSELF
IN THE LATE 20TH CENTURY.
POETS STEEPED
THEIR WORK
IN THE BRUTE
EXPERIENCE OF REALISM
AND GOT THEIR HANDS DIRTY
WITH POLITICAL ACTIVISM.
SOME OF THE BIGGEST
NAMES ON THE CONTINENT
FIRST MADE THEIR MARK
IN THE 60'S AND BECAME
POETIC FIXTURES IN
THE 70'S AND LATER:
THE URUGUAYANS
MARIO BENEDETTI
AND EDUARDO GALEANO,
THE ARGENTINEANS
PACO URONDO
AND JUAN GELMAN,
THE CHILEAN
ARIEL DORFMAN.
OTHER, MORE
ESTABLISHED WRITERS,
ALSO FLOURISHED
AT THIS TIME,
SUCH AS PABLO NERUDA
- WHO DIED IN 1973 -
OR GONZALO ROJAS,
AMONG OTHERS.
THE POET OF THIS
PERIOD WAS A KIND OF
SHARPSHOOTER, PICKING
OFF CULTURAL AND
SOCIAL TARGETS WITH
HEARTLESS ACCURACY.
IN HIS POEM PRACTICAL
SEMANTICS, MARIO BENEDETTI
PINPOINTS HIS VICTIMS WITH
CHARACTERISTIC PRECISION:
THEY WANT ME TO SHELTER
MYSELF WITHIN YOU
SOFT WORD
SILASILLY...
THE TEMPTATION OR THE
ORDER IS TO WATCH YOU,
SO I FORGET ABOUT THOSE
WHO DO TO YOU AND UNDO YOU
THEY FORGE YOU AND
THEY LIQUEFY YOU
THEY GOT TO
SAY THAT YOU WERE
HEAR THIS GENTLEMEN,
THE GREAT PROTAGONIST
FROM WHERE
SOFT SILASILLY.
YOUR ONLY SALVATION IS
TO BE OUR INSTRUMENT.
CARESS SCALPEL METAPHOR
GUN HOOK OSCILLATORIA
BLASPHEMY LOCK
ETC. YOU'LL SEE.
THE SAME KIND OF QUIET
LYRICISM INFORMS THE WORK
OF THE URUGUAYAN WRITER
EDUARDO GALEANO.
IN THE EARLY 80'S
HE PUBLISHED HIS
MEMORIA DEL FUEGO,
OR MEMORY OF FIRE,
A TRILOGY THAT REVISITS
THE LATIN AMERICAN PAST,
BOTH RECENT
AND DISTANT.
THE CHARACTERS THAT
POPULATE MEMORY OF FIRE
ARE PLUCKED FROM THE
PAGES OF HISTORY:
GENERALS, ARTISTS,
REVOLUTIONARIES, WORKERS,
CONQUERORS AND
THE CONQUERED -
ALL ARE PORTRAYED IN
BRIEF EPISODES THAT
ENCAPSULATE THE COLONIAL
HISTORY OF THE CONTINENT.
THE STORY BEGINS AT THE
BEGINNING, RECOUNTING
PRE-COLUMBIAN CREATION
MYTHS, AND IT ENDS IN
WHAT WAS THEN THE PRESENT
DAY - THE 1980'S.
GALEANO IS FASCINATED
WITH THE SEEMINGLY
INDEFATIGABLE URGE TO
RESIST COLONIAL OPPRESSORS,
AND HIGHLIGHTS BOTH
MASS REVOLUTIONARY
MOVEMENTS AND INDIVIDUAL
ACTS OF HEROISM.
THE INEVITABILITY OF
DEFEAT IS PALPABLE
THROUGHOUT, HOWEVER;
NO SOONER HAD THE
OLD COLONIAL OVERLORDS
BEEN CLEARED OUT
THAN NEW DICTATORSHIPS
AND PERSECUTION AROSE,
SPREADING DEATH AND
CRUSHING THE WRITTEN WORD.
THERE IS A NEED THAT HAS A
LOT TO DO WITH POLITICS,
ALTHOUGH IT DEPENDS
ON HOW YOU LOOK AT IT.
IT'S A NEED TO
RECOVER WORDS.
MY TRADE, AFTER ALL, IS
THE TRADE OF THE WRITER.
AND I FEEL THAT WITH THE
WAY THE POLITICS OF POWER
ARE HANDLED IN THE
WORLD NOWADAYS,
THERE IS A SULLYING
OF WORDS GOING ON.
AND I FEEL THAT AS A
WRITER I CAN HELP A LITTLE
WITH THEIR RECOVERY, OR
AT LEAST TRY TO DO SO.
WE HAVE THE JOY
OF OUR PAINS BECAUSE
WE DO NOT CARE ABOUT
THE PAINLESS LIFE
THAT SOCIETY OF CONSUMPTION
SOLD IN SUPERMARKETS;
WE HAVE THE JOY
OF OUR MISTAKES,
TUMBLES THAT
PROVE TO US
THE PASSION OF WALKING
AND THE LOVE TO THE WAY;
AND WE HAVE THE
JOY OF OUR DEFEATS
BECAUSE THE FIGHT FOR
JUSTICE AND BEAUTY,
IT IS WORTH IT
ALSO WHEN IT IS LOST.
THE NICARAGUAN POET
ERNESTO CARDENAL IS,
TO NORTH AMERICAN
SENSIBILITIES,
A STUDY
IN CONTRASTS.
BORN INTO A WEALTHY
FAMILY, HE ESCHEWED THE
HIGH LIFE AND, AFTER A
FAILED REVOLUTIONARY
COUP D'ETAT LEFT MANY
FRIENDS AND COMRADES DEAD,
HE ENTERED THE TRAPPIST
MONASTERY AT GETHSEMANE
TO BE UNDER THE
TUTELAGE OF THE FAMOUS
POET-PRIEST
THOMAS MERTON.
HE WAS ORDAINED A
CATHOLIC PRIEST IN 1965
AND CONTINUED HIS
ACTIVITIES AS A
POLITICAL REVOLUTIONARY
AND VISIONARY POET.
HE ALLIED HIMSELF
WITH THE SANDINISTAS,
A LEFT-WING NICARAGUAN
POLITICAL PARTY, AND
ESTABLISHED A RELIGIOUS
AND ARTISTIC COMMUNITY
ON THE SOLENTINAME ISLANDS
IN LAKE COCIBOLCA.
AS A PRIEST HE WAS A
SEMINAL THINKER IN THE
LIBERATION THEOLOGY
MOVEMENT, WHICH LINKS
ACTIVE FAITH IN GOD
WITH AN IMPERATIVE FOR
SOCIAL ACTION IN
THE COMMUNITY.
AS A POET HE WAS NO
LESS REVOLUTIONARY,
PRODUCING POEMS THAT
ISSUE A CALL TO ACTION
WITHOUT DEVOLVING
INTO STRIDENCY,
THAT ARE IMBUED WITH
SIMPLICITY AND WONDER,
NARRATED BY THE VOICES
OF EVERYDAY FOLK.
TO GO ON
TRAVELING.
AND THAT
FUCKED UP TRIP.
THE UNEXPECTED PHONE CALL
FROM MANAGUA TO THE LAST
ISLAND OF THE ANTILLES:
"ERNESTO, LAUREANO DIED".
IN THE
TRINIDAD-BARBADOS-JAMAICA-
HAVANA-MANAGUA FLIGHT
WATCHING SEA,
AND SEA, I COULD NOT
THINK IN ANYTHING ELSE.
SINCE WE HAVE BEEN BORN
WITH A BAD PROGNOSIS
THE BEST THING TO DO
IS TO DIE AS A HERO
AND A MARTYR
AS YOU DIED.
OF COURSE IT WOULD HAVE BEEN
BETTER IF YOU NEVER DIED,
PROVIDED THAT YOUR WIFE
AND YOUR CHILDREN
AND YOUR FRIENDS AND THE
ENTIRE WORLD NEVER DIED.
PARTNER! SUB-COMMANDER
LAUREANO,
CHIEF OF THE
FRONTIER POLICE:
I SAY ALONG WITH YOU, THAT
WE GIVE A SHIT ABOUT DEATH.
IN ARGENTINA, MIXING
POETRY WITH MILITANT
POLITICS CAME AT
CONSIDERABLE PERIL.
JUAN GELMAN IS ONE OF HIS
NATION'S LEADING POETS,
BUT WAS FORCED INTO
POLITICAL EXILE IN 1976.
HIS SON, DAUGHTER-IN-LAW,
AND GRANDCHILD ARE AMONG
THE "DESAPARECIDOS" -
THE "DISAPPEARED ONES",
VICTIMS OF THE
GOVERNMENT'S SO-CALLED
"WAR AGAINST SUBVERSION",
MANY OF WHOM WERE
DRUGGED AND DUMPED FROM
AIRCRAFT INTO THE SEA.
THESE POEMS, THIS
COLLECTION OF PAPERS,
THIS HERD OF PIECES THAT
ARE TRYING TO BREATHE,
THESE ROUGH SMOOTH
WORDS GATHERED BY ME,
THEY ARE GOING TO
COST MY SALVATION.
SOMETIMES THEY ARE
WORSE THAN FACTS OR,
MORE ACCURATE, TIME PASSING
DOES NOT SHARPEN THEM
DOES NOT GET THEM PRETTIER;
IT DISCOVERS ITS CRACKS,
ITS ABRADED WALLS, THE
CEILING SINKS AND RAINS.
THE POET, PLAYWRIGHT
AND JOURNALIST
FRANCISCO "PACO"
URONDO ALSO DARED
CONFRONT HIS COUNTRY'S
RULING MILITARY JUNTA.
JUAN GELMAN SAID OF HIM
THAT "THERE WAS NO ABYSS
BETWEEN EXPERIENCE AND
POETRY FOR URONDO".
HE WAS ASSASSINATED
IN 1975.
THE WORK OF
BOTH THESE POETS
DISPLAYS AN
INESCAPABLE TENSION
BETWEEN DESIRE
AND DESPAIR.
CRUELTY DOES NOT SCARE
ME AND I ALWAYS LIVED
DAZZLED BY
THE PURE ALCOHOL,
THE WELL WRITTEN BOOK,
THE PERFECT FLESH.
I'M USED TO TRUSTING MY
STRENGTH AND MY HEALTH AND
MY DESTINY AND GOOD LUCK:
I KNOW THAT I WILL GET TO
SEE THE REVOLUTION, THE
FEARED AND CARESSED JUMP,
STRIKING THE DOOR
OF OUR LAZINESS.
I AM SURE TO GET TO LIVE
IN THE HEART OF A WORD;
TO SHARE THIS HEAT, THIS
FATALITY THAT HAS NO USE
WHEN IT IS STILL
AND ROTTEN.
TO BE SPEAKING, TO HOLD
THIS VICTORY, THIS FIST;
TO SAY GOODBYE,
TO DISMISS.
HUMBLY I CAN SAY THAT LIFE
IS THE BEST THING I KNOW.
REFLECTION ON THE MEANING
OF THE WRITTEN WORD
RUNS THROUGH THE WORK OF
ANOTHER OF THE CONTINENT'S
MOST IMPORTANT
POETS:
THE MEXICAN
JOSE EMILIO PACHECO.
PACHECO'S TALENT WAS
APPARENT FROM AN EARLY AGE,
AND WHILE STILL
IN HIS TWENTIES
HE WAS ALREADY
KEEPING COMPANY
WITH THE GREAT WRITERS
OF LATIN AMERICA.
IN ADDITION TO HIS POETRY,
HE HAS PUBLISHED AND
SUPPORTED THE WORKS OF
MANY LESSER KNOWN POETS,
AND IS A RESPECTED
SCHOLAR.
HERE COMES THE IDENTICAL
RAIN AND ITS ANGRY WEEDS
- THE SALT, THE
UNDONE SEA.
THE PREVIOUS
DEED IS ERASED,
IT IS WRITTEN
AFTERWARDS.
THIS CONVEX SEA,
ITS MIGRATORY AND
ROOTED CUSTOMS.
IT WAS ALREADY USED BEFORE
TO MAKE A THOUSAND POEMS.
(THE INFECTED DOG, THE
POETRY WITH SCABIES,
A LAUGHABLE VARIETY
OF NEUROSIS,
PRICE THAT SOME MEN PAY FOR
NOT KNOWING HOW TO LIVE.
THE SWEET, ETERNAL,
ENLIGHTENING POETRY.)
THE LATIN AMERICAN BOOM
HAD DOMINATED LITERATURE
IN THE 1960'S, BUT AS
THE PHENOMENON MATURED
IT BECAME ENMESHED IN
CRITICAL REFORMULATIONS
AND ARTISTIC
REFUTATIONS.
AS THE BOOM'S ECHOES BEGAN
TO FADE, THERE AROSE WHAT
HAS COME TO BE CALLED THE
"NEW HISTORICAL NOVEL",
A GENRE WHICH INCLUDES
SOME OF THE MOST
IMPORTANT TEXTS FROM
THE LAST THIRTY YEARS.
WORKS THAT FALL UNDER
THIS RUBRIC INCLUDE
A HALLUCINATING WORLD
BY THE CUBAN WRITER
REINALDO ARENAS;
I, THE SUPREME
BY AUGUSTO ROA
BASTOS OF PARAGUAY;
BAROQUE CONCERT BY ALEJO
CARPENTIER OF CUBA;
VIEW OF DAWN
IN THE TROPICS
BY GUILLERMO CABRERA
INFANTE, ALSO FROM CUBA;
AND TERRA NOSTRA BY MEXICAN
AUTHOR CARLOS FUENTES.
ALL THESE NOVELS
DISPLAY SIMILAR FAMILY
CHARACTERISTICS: MANY
USE FAMOUS HISTORICAL
CHARACTERS AS
PROTAGONISTS; THEY PRESENT
LAYERED NARRATIVES WITH
MULTIPLE PERSPECTIVES
ON PAST EVENTS;
AND THEY ARE BITING BUT
AFFECTIONATE PARODIES
THAT SIMULTANEOUSLY
CRITIQUE
AND PAY HOMAGE TO
THEIR SUBJECTS.
ANOTHER PHENOMENON THAT
ARISES WHEN THE NOVEL
LOSES ITS POLITICIZING
IDEAL - BECAUSE WRITERS
HAVE BEEN CO-OPTED
BY THE MARKETPLACE,
BECAUSE THEY HAVE
ALREADY GAINED ACCLAIM,
BECAUSE IN THEORY THEY DO
NOT CARE ANY MORE ABOUT
CONTRIBUTING TO THE
RADICALIZATION OF SOCIETY
- THERE IS A GAMBLE
ON A NEW GENRE,
THE GENRE
OF TESTIMONY.
SOME NEW HISTORICAL NOVELS
TAKE UP GREAT FIGURES
FROM THE PAST IN
ORDER TO CUT AWAY
THE MYTHOLOGIES THAT
HAVE BUILT UP AROUND THEM.
NO ONE IS SACRED: NOT THE
SPANISH KING PHILIP II
FROM THE COLONIAL
PERIOD; NOT MAXIMILIAN,
THE EMPEROR OF MEXICO
FROM THE HAPSBURG FAMILY,
NOR HIS WIFE THE
ARCHDUCHESS CHARLOTTE;
NOT EVEN CHRISTOPHER
COLUMBUS HIMSELF.
OTHER WORKS
REPRISE BASIC TEXTS
FROM THE
AMERICAN ARCHIVE.
FOR EXAMPLE, REINALDO
ARENAS, IN HIS BOOK
A HALLUCINATING WORLD,
REINVENTED THE
MEMOIRS OF FRAY
SERVANDO TERESA DE MIER,
A MEXICAN WHOSE
CHRONICLE OFFERED READERS
A BOTTOM-UP HISTORY
OF THE NEW WORLD.
WITH FRAY SERVANDO,
EUROPEANS GOT THEIR FIRST
GLIMPSE OF LATIN AMERICA
WITHOUT THE FILTER OF
COLONIALISM, AND LATIN
AMERICANS BEGAN TO
THINK OF THEMSELVES
AS A DISTINCT ENTITY
DEFINED BY
SHARED HISTORY.
NOTHING IS HEARD HERE.
YOU CANNOT EVEN SEE
THE FIELDS OR THE SEA.
PEOPLE DIE HERE IN
SILENCE MADE FOR SADNESS.
I HAVE TO LEAVE YOU
HERE ALONE IN THIS PLACE
WHERE I WOULD NOT KNOW
WHAT TO DO OR TO THINK,
OR HOW TO ESCAPE.
BUT YOU ARE ALREADY
COMING UP WITH
THOUSANDS OF SOLUTIONS;
YOU HAVE A PLAN
AND THAT IS ALL YOU
WILL THINK ABOUT.
AND YOU WRITE
HUNDREDS OF LETTERS
THAT THEY WILL
NOT SEND ANYWHERE.
BUT YOU WRITE, WITH A
PEN OF BIRD'S FEATHER
AND A STICK TO
FEND OFF THE RATS.
IT IS GETTING DARK AND
THERE IS NOT A CANDLE.
THE ONLY
WAY TO WRITE
IS BY THE SHINING
EYES OF THE RATS.
AND WITH THAT
CLARITY, YOU WRITE.
JUST AS ARENAS REFERRED TO
THE WORK OF FRAY SERVANDO,
THE BRAZILIAN WRITER
SILVIANO SANTIAGO'S NOVEL
IN FREEDOM, FROM
1981, BUILDS UPON
GRACILIANO RAMOS'
MEMORIES OF PRISON,
WHICH WAS
PUBLISHED IN 1953.
THE 1970'S SAW THE
PUBLICATION OF A SERIES
OF NOVELS ON DICTATORSHIPS
AND DICTATORS
WRITTEN BY SOME OF THE BEST
KNOWN AUTHORS OF THE BOOM:
CONVERSATION
IN THE CATHEDRAL
BY MARIO VARGAS LLOSA
CAME OUT IN 1971;
THE RECOURSE
TO THE METHOD
BY ALEJO CARPENTIER
IN 1974;
AND THE AUTUMN
OF THE PATRIARCH
BY GABRIEL GARCIA
MARQUEZ IN 1975.
AT THE SAME TIME, THE FIGURE
OF THE REVOLUTIONARY
COMES UNDER THE SCRUTINY
OF NOVELISTS SUCH AS
JULIO CORTAZAR IN HIS
WORK A MANUAL FOR MANUEL
AND MANUEL PUIG IN THE
KISS OF THE SPIDER WOMAN.
THEY TOUCH GOBLETS
AND DRINK WITHOUT
SAYING ANOTHER WORD,
JUST HOLDING HANDS.
ALL OF A SUDDEN SHE
LETS GO OF HIS HAND;
SHE'S SEEN SOMEONE
COMING OVER TO THE TABLE.
IT'S A WOMAN, BEAUTIFUL
LOOKING AT FIRST GLANCE,
BUT A SECOND LATER
YOU NOTICE SOMETHING
STRANGE ABOUT HER FACE,
SOMETHING FRIGHTENING
AND YET IT'S HARD
TO KNOW WHAT IT IS.
BECAUSE IT'S
A WOMAN'S FACE
BUT ALSO THE
FACE OF A CAT.
THE EYES SLANT UP,
AND SO PECULIAR,
I DON'T KNOW
HOW TO TELL YOU,
SHE HAS NO
WHITES IN HER EYES,
HER EYES ARE COMPLETELY
GREEN IN COLOR,
WITH BLACK PUPILS AT THE
CENTER, AND NOTHING ELSE.
THE PERIOD 1973 AND 1976
SAW THE RISE OF BRUTAL
MILITARY DICTATORSHIPS
THROUGHOUT THE CONTINENT,
POISONING THE ATMOSPHERE
WITH PERSECUTION, EXILE,
AND ASSASSINATION.
THE UTTER DESPAIR CAUSED
BY THIS REPRESSION
BROUGHT ABOUT A
RADICAL REFORMULATION
OF LATIN AMERICAN
LITERATURE.
WRITERS SOUGHT OUT A NEW
VOICE, ONE THAT COULD
DESCRIBE HUMILIATING
DEFEAT ON THE ONE HAND,
AND THE HEARTBREAK
OF DISAPPEARANCE,
FEAR, OR EXILE,
ON THE OTHER.
AUTHORS AROSE WHO, WHILE
DENOUNCING THE HORROR OF
WHAT WAS HAPPENING, WERE
ABLE TO FILE THEIR REPORTS
THROUGH ELLIPSIS,
INFERENCE, AND METAPHOR.
SOME KEY FIGURES
FROM THIS PERIOD
ARE THE ARGENTINEANS
HECTOR TIZON,
DANIEL MOYANO,
LUISA VALENZUELA,
GRISELDA GAMBADO,
RICARDO PIGLIA,
AND DANIEL
FREIDEMBERG;
AND THE CHILEANS
ARIEL DORFMAN,
DIAMELA ELTIT,
GONZALO ROJAS,
AND OMAR LARA.
THERE IS AN IDEA THAT
CERTAIN GENRES ARE MORE
LIABLE TO BE POLITICIZED
AT CERTAIN TIMES,
AND IT MIGHT BE TRUE.
IT IS NOT REALITY
THAT DEMANDS IT.
IT IS THE REALM OF
CULTURE FIELD THAT DOES.
IT IS NOT THAT A NOVEL
CANNOT BE WRITTEN,
BUT THE NOVEL APPEARS
TO BE DEVALUED,
AND THEREFORE THE
INVESTMENT IN TESTIMONY
BECOMES MORE MASSIVE AND
IS EXERCISED MORE OFTEN.
WHAT REALITY IS ACTUALLY
DEMANDING FOR A LOT OF
PEOPLE IS THAT THE
IMMINENCE OF REVOLUTION,
IN ORDER TO
BECOME REAL,
CEASE BEING AN
ANNOUNCEMENT.
WHAT REALITY IS
DEMANDING IS THAT
THE REVOLUTION
ACTUALLY TAKE PLACE.
MANY WORKS WERE
WRITTEN BY WRITERS
EXILED IN EUROPE
OR MEXICO.
FROM THIS DISTANCE,
AUTHORS FELT SAFE ENOUGH
TO GIVE DIRECT TESTIMONY
ABOUT THE ATROCITIES
OF THIS PERIOD.
SUCH IS THE CASE FOR TEJAS
VERDES BY HERNAN VALDES.
ONE OF THE MOST
INTERESTING WORKS
IN THIS VEIN IS THE NOVEL
THE HOUSE AND THE WIND
BY THE ARGENTINEAN
WRITER HECTOR TIZON.
WRITTEN DURING TIZON'S
FORCED EXILE IN MADRID,
THE HOUSE AND THE WIND WAS
COMPOSED BY A MAN WHO WAS
UNDER THE PERMANENT AND
INTOLERABLE CERTAINTY
THAT HE HAS LOST HIS
COUNTRY, HIS HOME.
THIS SENSE OF LOSS
GIVES WAY TO AN
INCONSOLABLE EXPERIENCE OF
WRETCHEDNESS AND DESPAIR.
TO EVOKE SUCH MISERY, TO
BRING THE PAST TO A CLOSE
IN ORDER TO MAKE LIFE
ONCE AGAIN BEARABLE,
TIZON CRAFTED A
NOVEL OF REMEMBRANCE
WHICH IS BOTH
A LONG GOODBYE
AND AT THE SAME TIME
A KIND OF HOMECOMING.
WHEN I DECIDED TO GO,
TO LEAVE WHAT I LOVED
AND WAS MINE, I KNEW
THAT IT WAS FOREVER.
IT WAS NOT GOING TO BE
A SIMPLE ABSENCE BUT AN
IRREPARABLE AND SHAMELESS
ACT, LIKE RUNNING AWAY.
IN FACT, I THINK ALL
LEAVINGS WERE ESCAPES.
I THINK THAT IT IS THE
ONLY FORM OF DEPARTING.
BUT BEFORE FLEEING I
WANTED TO SEE WHAT I WAS
LEAVING BEHIND, TO FILL
MY HEART WITH IMAGES
TO RECOUNT MY LIFE NOT IN
YEARS BUT IN MOUNTAINS,
IN GESTURES, IN INFINITE
FACES; NEVER IN NUMBERS
BUT IN TENDERNESS, IN
RAGES, PAINS AND JOYS.
ANOTHER CRUCIAL NOVEL
FROM THIS PERIOD
IS ARTIFICIAL RESPIRATION
BY RICARDO PIGLIA,
A WORK THAT HAS HAD
A TREMENDOUS IMPACT
ON SUBSEQUENT
LITERATURE.
THE INSIDE COVER OF THE
NOVEL OFFERS CLUES TO THE
MEANING OF ITS TITLE,
ALLUDING OMINOUSLY TO
"DARK TIMES IN WHICH
MEN SEEM TO NEED
BOTTLED AIR
TO SURVIVE".
IN CIRCUMSPECT FASHION,
ARTIFICIAL RESPIRATION
DENOUNCES CRIMES COMMITTED
DURING THE ARGENTINEAN
MILITARY DICTATORSHIP, BUT
CONCEALS ITS TRUE INTENT
SO AS TO CONFUSE
THE CENSORS.
AS SUCH, THE WORK IS IN
MANY WAYS A MEDITATION
ON THE NATURE OF
REALITY, LITERALNESS,
AND TREACHERY.
AS IN OTHER FOUNDATIONAL
LATIN AMERICAN NOVELS,
SUCH AS JORGE LOUIS BORGES'
THE GARDEN OF FORKING PATHS,
ARTIFICIAL
RESPIRATION TAKES A
LABYRINTHINE TRAIL
TOWARDS THE TRUTH.
PIGLIA IS THE GREAT WRITER
OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY.
"HOW TO UNDERSTAND
ARGENTINA", RIGHT?
ONE QUESTION THAT APPEARS
IN ARTIFICIAL RESPIRATION
IS THE FOLLOWING:
"WHO AMONG US WILL
WRITE FACUNDO ?"
IN PIGLIA THERE IS AN
OBSESSION WITH REVEALING
THE POLITICAL STRUCTURES
WITHIN THE STORY,
ABOUT WRITING
POLITICAL FICTION,
ABOUT EXPLORING
THE BORDERS BETWEEN
CIVILIAN PARANOIA
AND STATE TERRORISM.
IS THERE A STORY?
IF THERE IS A STORY IT
STARTS THREE YEARS AGO.
IN APRIL OF 1976, WHEN MY
FIRST BOOK IS PUBLISHED,
HE SENDS ME A LETTER.
WITH THE LETTER THERE
IS A PHOTOGRAPH WHERE HE
HAS ME IN HIS ARMS:
NAKED, I AM SMILING,
I AM THREE MONTHS OLD
AND I LOOK LIKE A FROG.
HOWEVER, HE LOOKS GOOD
IN THAT PHOTOGRAPH:
DOUBLE BREASTED SUIT,
FEDORA HAT, FRANK SMILE:
A MAN OF 30 YEARS OLD
WHO LOOKS AT THE WORLD
WITH HIS CHIN UP.
AT THE BOTTOM, BLURRED
AND ALMOST OUT OF FOCUS,
MY MOTHER APPEARS,
SO YOUNG THAT
I COULD HARDLY
RECOGNIZE HER.
OTHER KEY TEXTS ALSO
ADDRESSED THE MISERY
OF LIFE UNDER THE
DICTATORSHIPS,
PARTICULARLY IN THE
SOUTHERN CONE REGION
ENCOMPASSING ARGENTINA,
CHILE, URUGUAY,
AND PARAGUAY.
THESE WORKS INCLUDE NOVELS
SUCH AS RIVER OF GRIEF
BY LIBERTAD
DEMITROPULOS
AND OTHER WEAPONS AND BLACK
NOVEL WITH ARGENTINES,
BOTH BY LUISA
VALENZUELA.
VALENZUELA IS ONE OF
THE MOST WIDELY READ
FEMALE WRITERS FROM LATIN
AMERICA, AN AUTHOR WHO HAS
CRAFTED NARRATIVES THAT
DRAW PARALLELS BETWEEN
AUTHORITARIAN POLITICAL
RULE AND PATRIARCHAL
DOMINATION IN RELATIONS
BETWEEN MEN AND WOMEN.
SOMEBODY PUT INTO
HER A SEED OF TERROR.
OR IS IT HER SEED
AND IT HAS GROWN?
IF IT IS SO, IF FEAR
DOES NOT COME TO ME
FROM THE OUTSIDE,
I SAY TO MYSELF
"THIS IS ME: MY FEAR. MY
FEAR IS A PART OF ME
AND THERE IS NO
NEED TO BE SCARED".
AGUSTIN, AGUSTIN, THIS
FEAR THAT IS PART
OF ONESELF IS THE
WORST OF THE FEARS.
IT CAN HAVE
YOU KILLED
WHEN YOU TRY TO
SUPPRESS IT, THE FEAR.
THE CHILEAN AUTHOR
DIAMELA ELTIT
BEGAN HER WRITING CAREER
UNDER THE DICTATORSHIP OF
GENERAL AUGUSTO PINOCHET,
WHO HAD COME TO POWER
IN A COUP THAT OUSTED
THE SOCIALIST GOVERNMENT
OF SALVADOR ALLENDE.
PINOCHET'S DETRACTORS
DENOUNCED HIM
FOR DESTROYING
CHILE'S DEMOCRACY,
SPONSORING
STATE-SUPPORTED TERRORISM
THAT KILLED AND
TORTURED THOUSANDS,
AND CATERING
TO THE WEALTHY
AT THE EXPENSE OF
THE LOWER CLASSES.
ELTIT'S WRITING
SUCCESSFULLY FUSES
POLITICS WITH THE DICTATES
OF LITERATURE IN PROTEST
AGAINST PREVAILING
SOCIAL STRUCTURES.
SHE IDENTIFIES THE
OBJECT OF OPPRESSION
IN HER SOCIETY AS
THE 'FEMININE',
THOUGH HER DEFINITION
OF THIS TERM IS BROAD,
AND ENCOMPASSES MORE
THAN JUST THE FEMALE.
"IF THE FEMININE IS
THAT WHICH IS OPPRESSED
BY THE CENTRAL SYSTEM
OF DOMINATION",
SHE WRITES "WE CAN, SAY,
THINK OF ETHNIC GROUPS,
SEXUAL MINORITIES AND
EVEN WHOLE COUNTRIES
AS THE FEMININE".
ELTIT WAS A FOUNDER OF THE
GROUP THAT CALLED ITSELF
CADA, THE COLECTIVO
DE ACCIONES DE ARTE
OR COLLECTIVE OF
ARTISTIC ACTIONS.
THE GROUP'S AIM WAS TO
PRACTICE TOTAL SOCIAL
COMMITMENT, BRINGING
TOGETHER THE DISPARATE
ELEMENTS OF ART,
LIFE AND POLITICS.
IN 1981, CADA SHOWERED
THE CITY OF SANTIAGO
WITH PAMPHLETS THROWN
FROM AN AIRPLANE.
THE PAMPHLETS DECLARED
THAT, "THE WORK OF
IMPROVING THE ACCEPTED
STANDARD OF LIVING
IS THE ONLY
VALID ART FORM".
ELTIT WROTE BOTH UNDER THE
PINOCHET DICTATORSHIP
AND DURING THE PERIOD
OF REDEMOCRATIZATION.
ONE OF HER MOST SUGGESTIVE
NOVELS IS THE FOURTH WORLD.
I WAS INVADED
THAT MORNING
BY AN INSANE
AND CHAOTIC MOOD.
THE INTERFERENCE
WITHIN MY SPACE
BECAME UNBEARABLE
TO ME, BUT I HAD TO
MAKE PEACE WITH
THE UNBEARABLE FACT.
AT FIRST IT WAS
RELATIVELY PLACID,
IN SPITE OF THE VAGUE
SICKNESS THAT SURROUNDED ME
AND THAT I NEVER
MANAGED TO SURPASS.
WE WERE JUST LARVAE
TAKEN BY WATERS,
HANDLED BY TWO CORDS
THAT WERE ABLE TO
KEEP US IN ALMOST
INDEPENDENT SPACES.
LATIN AMERICA CAME ROARING
OUT OF THE 1960'S -
ITS CULTURAL OUTPUT
WAS IN ASCENDANCY,
AND POLITICALLY
AND ECONOMICALLY
THE REGION WAS POISED
TO FINALLY TAKE
ITS RIGHTFUL PLACE
ON THE WORLD STAGE.
THE "BOOM" WAS NOT JUST
A LITERARY PHENOMENON -
IT WAS AN EXPRESSION OF
COLLECTIVE CONFIDENCE
AND OPTIMISM.
FINALLY, ITS
TIME HAD COME.
HOWEVER, THE DECADES
THAT FOLLOWED
DID NOT GO
AS PLANNED.
DICTATORS FLOURISHED,
ECONOMIES STRUGGLED,
AND THE ATTENTION OF
THE WORLD'S READERSHIP
GRADUALLY DRIFTED
ELSEWHERE.
CONFIDENCE TURNED INTO
ANXIETY AND OFTEN DESPAIR.
MASS MEDIA AROSE,
GENERATING A CONFUSING
KALEIDOSCOPE OF
VIEWPOINTS AND IMAGES.
YET THIS PERIOD
OF UNCERTAINTY
AND ANGUISH WAS,
IRONICALLY,
WILDLY PRODUCTIVE FOR
LATIN AMERICAN WRITERS.
AS THEIR SENSIBILITIES
MATURED, AUTHORS DOVE INTO
THE TENSIONS OF THEIR
TIMES, REDEFINING THE
POLITICAL DEBATES AND
OFFERING THEMSELVES
IN SERVICE OF
REVOLUTIONARY PROJECTS.
AND, AS NEVER BEFORE,
THE RANKS OF POETS,
NOVELISTS, AND ESSAYISTS
INCORPORATED NUMEROUS
AND DIVERSE
POPULAR VOICES.
AS DEATH, EXILE,
AND IMPOSED SILENCE
HAVE GIVEN WAY TO AN
UNEASY STATUS QUO,
THE WRITERS OF
LATIN AMERICA
HAVE BLAZED A NEW
PATH TO THE FUTURE,
CONFIDENT IN THEIR
ABILITY TO REFLECT
AND REFORM THEIR
CULTURAL HARVEST.
*